# Inheritance

- The parent-child relationship is expressed using the `extends` keyword.
> - Constructors are not members, so they are not inherited by subclasses.
> - but the constructor of the superclass can be invoked from the subclass.

# `Object` class

- It is contain in the `java.lang` package.
- All classes implicitly inherites `Object` class.
- Important **methods** of `Object` class:

### Methods of `Object` class
| Signature                           | Description                                                                            |
| ----------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `protected Object clones()`         | Create and returns a copy of this object.                                              |
| `public boolean equals(Object obj)` | Indicates whether some other objects is "equal to" this one.                           |
| `protected void finalize()`         | Called by the garbage collector to determines if there is any references to the object |
| `public final Class getClass()`     | Returns the runtime class of an object.                                                |
| `public int hashCode()`             | Returns a hash code value for the object.                                              |
| `public String toString()`          | Returns a string representation of the object.                                         |

# *is-a* and *has-a* relationships

- inheritance is a *is-a* relationship
- whereas *has-a* relationship indicate that a class has a certain property of an object of another class:
    ```java
    public class Car {
        private Engine engine;
    }
    ```
    > ***has-a*** relationship is also known as **Aggregation** or **Composition**


# What a subclass inherits ?

- Subclass inherits non-private members from the superclass.
- it also inherits non-private static members.

> constructors and block initializers are not inherited

# Type Casting

- There is two types of casting:
  - **Widening** Casting: converting a smaller type to a larger type size
  - **Narrowing** Casting: converting a larger type to a smaller size type
  
> Widening casting is automatically perform by the JVM

### Upcasting & Downcasting
- Upcasting is a "widening" conversion of an object
  - by assiging a subclass reference to a superclass variable
- Downcasting is a narrowing conversion 
  - by assigning a superclass reference to a subclass variable

```java
Animal anm;
Dog dog = new Dog();

anm = dog; // upcasting
dog = (Dog) anm; // downcasting
```

# `instanceof` Operator
- `instanceof` can be use to compare classes having a relationship
- It is commonly used with downcasting to ensure the object is of the desired subtype before casting

```java
if(animal instanceof Dog) {
    Dog dog = (Dog) animal;
    dog.bark();
} else if (animal instanceof Cat cat) { // Java 16
    cat.meow();
}
```

> Since Java 16, we can initialize a variable within the `instanceof` operator

# Static Binding and Dynamic Binding

- ***Binding*** refers to the determination of which method or field will be utilized when the code is executed.
- ***Binding*** process occurs at two stage: during compile time and at runtime

### Static Binding

- Also referred to ***early binding***, or ***compile-time binding***.
- The binding process occurs during compile time.
- `private`, `final` and `static` members use static binding.

### Dynamic Binding

- also referred to ***late binding***, or ***runtime binding***.
- The binding process occurs during runtime

```java
Animal myDog = new Dog();  // upcasting
Animal myCat = new Cat();  // upcasting

myDog.makeSound();  // Outputs: Bark
myCat.makeSound();  // Outputs: Meow
```
> We are using dynamic binding because we assign a subclass object to a superclass variable, and the method to be called is determined at runtime based on the actual object type.

> We are not able to access subclass specific methods by upcasting. `myDog` can not access `Dog` methods, only `Animal` methods

# Polymorphism

- Polymorphism refers to the ability to perform a single action in multiple ways.
- Based on type of binding, there are two types of polymorphism:
    1. compile-time or static polymorphism
    2. runtime or dynamic polymorphism
- We can perform polymorphism by:
    1. method overloading for static polymorphism
    2. method overriding for dynamic polymorphism

### Example of Polymorphism

```java
Movie[] movies = new Movie[3];

movies[1] = new ActionMovie("Die Hard", 120);
movies[2] = new ComedyMovie("The Hangover", 90);
movies[3] = new HorrorMovie("The Shining", 150);

for (Movie movie : movies) {
  movie.play();
}
```

# Method Overriding

- Method overriding allows a subclass to provide its own implementation of a method that is already defined in its parent class.
- Method overloading is used for ***dynamic* polymorphism**.
- To override a method:
  -  we should decorate with `@Override` annotation to get compilation check.
  -  the subclass must define a method with the same signature.

> `static` and `private` method cannot be overridden.

> The access modifier cannot be more restrictive than the subclass definition

### `super` keyword

`super` keyword allow to call the overridden method of its superclass.

```java
@Override
public void eat(String food) {
  super.eat("Pasta");
}
```

# Method Overloading

- Method overloading allows to define multiple methods with the same name in the same class, but with **different parameters**.
- Overloaded methods must differ in the number of parameters, order or type of their parameters
- Method overloading is used for ***static* polymorphism**.

```java
public void print(int nbr) {}
public void print(String str) {}
```

> The return type and access modifiers can be different

# Method Overriding vs Method Overloading
| Method Overriding                                                            | Method Overloading                                                                            |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Occurs when a class declares a method with same signature as its superclass. | Occurs when a class implements multiple methods under the same name with different signature. |
| Overrinding is tied to inheritance and its implemented in the subclass.      | Overloading is unrelated to inheritance and its implemented within the same class.            |
| The return type must be compatible with its overridden method.               | The return type can differs on each overloaded methods.                                       |
| Overriding is exclusive to instance (non-static) methods.                    | Overloading is applicable to any method, wheter it is static or non-static.                   |
| Method overriding is resolved at runtime.                                    | Method overloading is resolved at compile-time.                                               |

# Method Hiding in Inheritance

- **Method Hiding** refers to the technique of *overriding* an **inherited _static_ method**.
- The redefined static method in a subclass is said to **hide the *static* method** of its superclass.

```java
Vehicle.start(); // Vehicle starting...
Car.start(); // Car starting...
```
> Unlike instance method overriding, method hiding **does not use polymorphism**. The version of the static method that gets called is determined by the reference type, **not the object type** (what it holds).

> Method hiding technique is rarely used

# Field Hiding in Inheritance
- **Field Hiding** refers to the technique of *overriding* an **hinerited field** (static or non-static).

```java
Vehicle vehicle = new Car();
Car car = new Car();

System.out.println(vehicle.type); // -> Vehicle
System.out.println(car.type); // -> Car
```
> The version of the fields that get called is determined by the reference type, **not the object type** (what it holds).

# Constructors and Inheritance
- When an object of a class is instantiated, memory is allocateed for all instance variables, including those in all ancestors.
- We need to use the `super()` constructor immediatly at the first line of the subclass when inheriting from a superclass.
```java
public Car() {
    super("Gas");
}
```
> We can ommit the `super()` constructor if the superclass has a no-args constructor. Java will implicitly make the call.

> When an object of a subclass is created, memory is allocated (in the Heap) for all instance variables in both subclass and superclass.

# `this` and `super` keywords

- `this` keyword refers to the current object. It is used to access instance variables and methods of the current object.
  - `this()` is used to invoke other constructors from a constructor inside the same class.

- `super` keyword refers to the superclass of the current object. It is used to access the superclass's instance variables and methods.
  - `super()` is used to invoke superclass constructors from a subclass constructor.

> `this` and `super` can only be used in non-static methods.

# Abstract Methods and Classes

- Abstract classes can have abstract methods (methods without body) that must be implemented by the concrete (non-abstract) subclasses.

```java
public abstract class Subject {
  public abstract void teach();
}
```
> Abstract classes can not be instanciated.

> Abstract classes and methods **can not be *static***.

> An abstract class can be extended by another abstract class.

# `final` keyword

- `final` keyword is used to indicate that a variable, method, or class cannot be modified after it has been defined.
- When used with:
  - a **variable**: the value cannot be changed once it has been assigned.
  - a **class**: the class can not be inherited.
  - a **method**: the method cannot be overridden by any subclasses.
  - method **parameters**: the value of the parameter cannot be changed within the method.

# `sealed` keyword (Java 17)

- `sealed` classes and interfaces provide enhanced control over inheritances.
- the `permits` keyword allow to restrict the inheritance to predefined subclass.

```java
public sealed class Person permits Employee, Student {}
public final class Student extends Person {}
```

- Rules for a subclass to inherit a sealed class:
  - The subclass must be int the same module as the sealed class (in case we are using modules).
  - They must directly extend the sealed class.
  - They must have one of the following modifiers to describe how continue the sealing:
    - `final`: Cannot be extended further.
    - `sealed`: Can be extended by its permitted subclass.
    - `non-sealed`: Can be extended by any subclasses