### Spring Boot

Spring Boot provides the Spring Framework with pre-configured components and embedded servers, making it easier to develop and run applications without needing extensive configuration.

- **Spring Boot Starters**: Pre-built dependencies to simplify project setup. They bundle commonly-used libraries so developers don't need to search for and manually add each one. 
    > `spring-boot-starter-web`, `spring-boot-starter-data-jpa`.
  
- **Auto Configuration**: Automatically configures Spring applications based on the dependencies present on the classpath.

- **Spring Boot Actuator**: Provides production-ready features such as monitoring and management endpoints, allowing developers to track application health and metrics.

- **Embedded Server**: Spring Boot provides embedded web servers like Tomcat, Jetty, or Undertow, allowing applications to be run directly without needing external servers.

- **Spring Boot DevTools**: Provides tools to improve the development experience, such as automatic application restarts and live reloading, making it easier to test and iterate during development.

### Spring Architecture

- **Presentation Layer**: This layer contains all the controllers that handle incoming HTTP requests and send responses. It acts as the interface between the client (e.g., web browser or API consumer) and the service layer.

- **Service Layer**: This layer is responsible for handling business logic. It processes requests received from the presentation layer, performs required operations, and coordinates with the data access layer.

- **Data Access Layer**: Also called the repository layer, it deals with data interaction and persistence. This layer contains repository interfaces and is responsible for interacting with the database using technologies like JPA or Hibernate.

### `@GetMapping`

```java
@RestController
public class HelloController {
    @GetMapping("/hello")
    public HelloResponse hello() {
        return new HelloResponse("Hello World");
    }
}
```
> When returning an object, `GetMapping` automatically convert the object to json 

### `@PathVariable`

`@PathVariable` allows to extract values from the URI path and use them as method parameters in your controller.

```java
@GetMapping("/hello/{name}")
public HelloResponse helloParam(@PathVariable String name) {
    return new HelloResponse("Hello " + name);
}
```
> The path variable name (`{name}`) and the method parameter name (`String name`) must match.