# Bags, Queues, and Stacks

- **Linked list** enables implementation of **bags**, **queues**, and **stacks**

  > Understanding linked lists is a **key first step** to the study of algorithms and data structures

## APIs

### Bags

- A bag is a collection where **removing** items is **not supported**.
- its purpose is to provide clients with the ability to **collect** items and
- then to **iterate** through the collected items

> the client can also test if a bag is empty and find its number of items

- The **order** of iteration is unspecified and should be **irrelevant** to the client

> We could use a **stack** or a **queue**, but to emphasize that the order is insignificant **we use a Bag**

### FIFO queues

- A FIFO **queue** (or just a queue) is a collection that is based on the **first-in-first-out** (FIFO) policy.

- A typical **use-case** is to save items in a collection and **preserving their relative order**

> they come out in the same order in which they were put in

### Pushdown stacks

- A pushdown stack (or just a stack) is a collection that is based on the **last-in-first-out** (LIFO) policy

- A typical use-case is to save items in a collection and **reversing their relative order**

### Loitering

- **Loitering** refers to a orphan reference still in memory event thought the object is no longer accessible.
- We can avoid loitering by explicitly setting those orphaned references to `null` **before dereferencing** them.

### Iteration

- One of the fundamental operations on collections is to process each item by iterating through it.
- **To implement** in any **iterable** collection:
  - The collection must implement an `iterator()` method that returns an `Iterator` object
  - The Iterator class must include **two methods**:
  - `hasNext()`: which returns a boolean value
  - and `next()`: which returns a generic item from the collection.

> What is an iterator? An object from a class that implements the methods hasNext() and next()

## Linked lists

- A **linked list** is a **recursive** data structure ...

  - that is either empty (`null`) ...
  - or a reference to **a node** ...

- A **node** contains:
  - a generic item (a **value**) ...
  - and a **reference** to the **next node**.

### Node record

A Node has two instance variables: an `Item` (a parameterized type) and a `Node`

```java
private class Node {
  Item item;
  Node next;
}
```

## Overview

### Data structures

We now have two ways to represent collections of objects, **arrays** and **linked lists**
These two alternatives, often referred to as **sequential** allocation and **linked** allocation.

## Q & A

- Why does Java disallow generic arrays?
  - Experts still debate this point. You might need to become one to understand it!
  - For starters, learn about **covariant arrays** and **type erasure**
- How do I create an array of stacks of strings?
  - `Stack<String>[] a = (Stack<String>[]) new Stack[N];`
    > we must cast to `Stack<String>[]`
- Why do we care about **resizing arrays**, when we have linked lists?
  - arrays offer **constant-time** access, making them efficient for **random access** operations
  - while linked lists excel in **dynamic resizing** and **insertion/deletion** operations
- Can I use a **foreach** loop **with arrays**?
  - Yes (even though arrays **do not implement** the **Iterable** interface)
- Why not have **a single collection** data type that implements methods ?
  - This is an example of a **_wide interface_** (**LinkedList** is an example)
    One reason to avoid them is that it there is no assurance that all operations are implemented **efficiently**

---

_fin de chapitre_
