# `LinkedList`

- `LinkedList` is similar to `ArrayList`, they both implement `List` interface.
- In a `LinkedList`, each element (called "nodes") is connected to its neighboring elements using *pointers*.
- Unlike `Arrays` and `ArrayList`, `LinkedList` has fast performance for random insertions and deletions of elements.
    > However, random access has slow performance, has it needs to traverse all the nodes sequentially.
- Iterating over and sorting a `LinkedList` works same to an `ArrayList`.

```java
LinkedList<String> list = new LinkedList<>();
```

> `LinkedList` in Java are *double linked list*, each nodes contains a link to the *previous* and *next* node.

### `ArrayList` vs `LinkedList`

- `ArrayList` is faster random **access** 
- `LinkedList` is faster random **insertion** and **deletion** 

### `LinkedList` Common Methods

- Like `ArrayList`, `LinkedList` implements all the methods from the `List` interface:
  - `boolean add(E e)`: Appends the specified element to the end of the list.
  - `void add(int index, E element)`: Inserts the specified element at the specified position in this list.
  - `E get(int index)`: Returns the element at the specified position in this list.
  - `E remove(int index)`: Removes the element at the specified position in this list.
  - `boolean remove(Object o)`: Removes the first occurrence of the specified element from this list, if it is present.
  - `int size()`: Returns the number of elements in this list.
  - `void clear()`: Removes all of the elements from this list.

- In addition, `LinkedList` also implements methods from the Queue and Deque interfaces:
  - `Deque` interface:
    - `void addFirst(E e)`: Inserts the specified element at the beginning of this list.
    - `void addLast(E e)`: Appends the specified element to the end of this list.
    - `E removeFirst()`: Removes and returns the first element from this list.
    - `E removeLast()`: Removes and returns the last element from this list.
    - `E getFirst()`: Returns the first element in this list.
    - `E getLast()`: Returns the last element in this list.
  
  - `Queue` interface:
    - `E peek()`: Retrieves, but does not remove, the head (first element) of this list, or returns `null` if this list is empty.
    - `E poll()`: Retrieves and removes the head (first element) of this list, or returns `null` if this list is empty.
    - `boolean offer(E e)`: Inserts the specified element into this list if it is possible to do so immediately without violating capacity restrictions.

# Iterating and Sorting `LinkedList`

Iterating and sorting a LinkedList is same as for an ArrayList.
- **To iterate**, we can use: `for-each`, `iterator()`, and `listIterator()`.
- **To sort**, we can use: `sort()` by implementing `Comparable` or `Comparator`.

