# Packages

- Packages are used to organize classes into namespaces.
- A package is a collection of related classes, interface, enums.

## Advantage of packages:

1. Organization of the code.
   - Organize large codebases into logical units
   - easier to manage and maintain.

2. Encapsulation
   - Hide implementation details
3. Access control
   - control access to classes using access modifiers (`public`, `private`, `protected`)
4. Namespacing
   - provide a way to avoid naming conflicts between classes name.

> If we don't use a package, our type ends up in an unnamed (default) package


# Architectural Patterns

Common layers used in Java applications:
- Model layer:
  - represente the data of an application
- Service layer:
  - responsible for the business logic ...
  - and processing data received from the model layer.
- Utility layer:
  - provides common functionality that can be reused across the application.
  - typically contains helper classes, constants and utility methods.
- Controller layer:
  - responsible for handling user input and presenting data to the user.
- Presentation layer:
  - responsible for presenting data to the user in a format for display.

# `java.lang` package

- The `java.lang` is a special package that is automatically imported into any Java program
- It contains classes and interfaces that are essential to the core functionality like:
- It contains: Wrapper classes, `Object`, `Throwable`, ...

# Important points about packages

- Wildcard import doesn't allow recursive imports
  - it only import the classes directly inside the packages, 
  - not the classes in the subpackages
  ```java
  import java.util.*;
  import java.util.regex.*;
  ```

- If two classes have the same name, we must use there qualified name
  ```java
  Shape.Rectangle rect1;
  Graphics.Rectangle rect2;
  ```

# Access Modifiers

- `public`: can be accessed **from anywhere**.
- `private`: can only be accessed within the **same class**.
- `protected`: can only be accessed within the **same package**, and **subclasses** inside or outside the package.
- ***default***: can only be accessed within the **same package**.
> An outer class can only be `public` or *default*, only inner class can also be `private` and `protected`.

>  An outer class can not be `static`, whereas an inner class **can** be `static`

# POJO (Plain Old Java Classes)

- POJO classes are used to represent entities or data objects.
- These classes only contain:
  - properties that hold data
  - and getter and setter methods to access and modify those data

> POJO are also called **DTO** (Data Transfer Object) or **JavaBean**.

# Encapsulation

Encapsulation refers to two concepts:

- Grouping attributes and behaviors together within a single object.
- Using access modifiers to hide certain fields and methods from public access 