# Understand `System.out.println`

`System.out.println` ia a statement used to print output to the console.
1. `System`: 
   - `System` is a class in the `java.lang` package.
   - It provides access to the standard input, output, and error streams.
   - The `out` field of the `System` class represents the **standard output stream** (We commonly only use to output in a console).
2. `out`:
   - `out` is a static field in the `System` class of type `PrintStream`.
   - It is an instance of the `PrintStream` class.
   - It provides methods to **print different types of data to various output streams.**
3. `println`: 
   - `println` is a method of the `PrintStream` class.
   - It is used to print a line of text to the output stream.

> Behind the scenes, `System.out` take care of creating the object of `PrintStream`. Instead of us, creating the `PrintStream` object manually.

# `System.out.read()`
- `System.in` is a static final variable that returns an `InputStream` instance.
- The `read()` method of the `InputStream` class allows getting input from the end user.
- However, `read()` has limitations, such as accepting only a single character and returning it as an ASCII representation.
   ```java
   int num = System.in.read();
   ```
Java provides two better options for efficiently reading data from an `InputStream`:
   - `java.io.BufferedReader`
   - `java.util.Scanner`

# `java.io.BufferReader`

- The `BufferedReader` class reads text from a character-input stream.
- It inherits from the abstract `Reader` class and provides buffering capability.
- It employs an internal buffer (8 KB by default) to store chunks of characters in memory.
   - This approach minimizes the frequency of I/O operations.
- It accepts a Reader as a parameter to connect to an input source.
   - Typically, it is used to connect to the standard input stream `System.in` via an `InputStreamReader`.
- The `readLine()` method reads a line of text from the console.
   - `readLine()` always returns a `String`.

```java
InputStreamReader isr = new InputStreamReader(System.in);
BufferedReader bf = new BufferedReader(isr);
System.out.println("Please enter a value...");
String input = bf.readLine();
System.out.println("The user entered a value: "+ input);
bf.close();
```

> `java.util.Scanner` is prefered to use over `BufferReader`

# Reading File with `BufferedReader`

`readLine()` returns one line and move the cursor to the next line.

```java
FileReader fileReader = new FileReader("/Users/eazybytes/Desktop/story.txt");
BufferedReader reader = new BufferedReader(fileReader);
String line;

while ((line = reader.readLine()) != null){
   System.out.println(line);
}
reader.close();
```

# `java.util.Scanner`

- `Scanner` provides a more convinient way to read input from various sources.
- It allows us to read input of different data types
- `nextLine()` read the next token of input as a string and assign it to the name variable.

```java
Scanner sc = new Scanner(System.in);

System.out.println("Enter your name:");
String name = sc.nextLine();

System.out.println("Enter your age:");
int age = sc.nextInt(); // allow only int value

System.out.println(age+ " years old.");
sc.close();
```

# Reading File with `Scanner`

- `hasNextLine()` returns false if it reach the end of the document
- `nextLine()`read the next token of input as a string and assign it to the name variable.

```java
File file = new File("/Users/eazybytes/Desktop/story.txt");
Scanner sc = new Scanner(file);
while (sc.hasNextLine()){
   System.out.println(sc.nextLine());
}
sc.close();
```

# `BufferedReader` vs `Scanner`

- BufferReader is faster and more efficient.
- BufferReader is better suited for reading large size input data because of its buffer size of 8KB.

> `Scanner` is a more versatile tool that can parse user input and extract various data types.

# Loggin

`java.util.logging` provides a logging mechanism to record various events and activites.

```java
private static Logger logger = Logger.getLogger(LoggingDemo.class.getName());

public static void main(String[] args) {
   logger.setLevel(Level.SEVERE); // only "severe" log and higher level will be display
   logger.info("This is info level logging");
   logger.log(Level.WARNING, "This is warning level logging");
   logger.severe("This is severe level logging");
}
```