## Stream API

- The `java.util.stream` package provides classes for processing sequences of elements.
- Streams can be created from collections, arrays, or generator functions (e.g., iterators or suppliers).
- Stream operations are typically written in a declarative style, similar to functional programming.

#### Creating a Stream from a Collection

- We can create a stream from a collection in two ways:
  - By calling the `stream()` method available in all collection classes.
    > `parallelStream()` can be used instead of `stream()` to performs operations in parallel.
    ```java
    List<String> departmentList = new ArrayList<>();
    // ... add elements
    Stream<String> depStream = departmentList.stream();
    depStream.forEach(System.out::println);
    ```
    > Note: we are using the *Constructor Method Reference* shorthand to use `println`
  - By using the `Stream.of()` method to create a stream from a collection or other values.
    ```java
    Stream<String> inStream = Stream.of("Eazy", "Bytes", "Java");
    inStream.forEach(System.out::println);
    ```
- Stream operations do not modify the original collection.
  - Instead, they return new streams that contain the processed results.

#### Array to Stream

The static method `Arrays.stream()` was introduce to convert an array into stream.

```java
String[] arrayOfWords = {"Eazy", "Bytes"};
Stream<String> streamOfWords = Arrays.stream(arrayOfWords);
```
#### Creating an Empty Stream
We can initialize an empty stream with `Stream.empty()`
```java
Stream<String> emptyString = Stream.empty();
```
#### Creating an Infinite Stream

We can use `generate()` or `iterate()` to create an infinite stream.

- `Stream.generate()` creates an infinite stream using a `Supplier`.
  
  ```java
  Stream.generate(new Random()::nextInt).forEach(System.out::println);
  ```

- `Stream.iterate()` generates an infinite stream starting from a seed and applying a function to produce each subsequent element.
  
  ```java
  Stream.iterate(1, n -> n + 1).forEach(System.out::println);
  ```

> **Note:** Use `limit()` to prevent infinite streams from running indefinitely.


## Streams have no storage

- Streams do not store elements in memory. It pulls elements from a data source.
- They operate on elements lazily, processing them on-the-fly as needed.

## Streams Pipeline