## MultiThreading

- MultiThreading allows multiple tasks to be performed simultaneously, potentially improving overall performance.
- When the number of threads exceeds the number of cores, the operating system employs ***context-switching***, where multiple threads share the same core.
  > Since ***context-switching*** can impact performance, it is generally more efficient to align the number of threads closely with the number of available cores to optimize processing efficiency.

#### Processes
- A process is an independent unit running in its own memory space.
- The OS manages processes, allocates resources, and provides isolation between them.
- Each process has its own address space, file descriptors, and system resources.

#### Threads
- A thread refers to a sequence of instructions within a process that can be executed independently by a CPU core.
- A thread is the smallest unit of execution within a process.
- Multiple threads can exist within a single process.
- Threads share the same memory space within a process, enabling efficient communication.
- Threads can run concurrently, with the OS scheduling their execution on the CPU.

## Parallel vs Concurrent Execution

- **Parallel execution** occurs when multiple threads run simultaneously on different CPU cores.
  > Tasks truly run at the same time, leveraging multiple cores or processors to increase efficiency.

- **Concurrent execution** involves running multiple threads on the same CPU core by using ***context-switching***.
  > This is achieved through time-slicing, where each thread gets a portion of the CPU's time, creating the illusion of simultaneous execution.

> Most of the time, concurrent execution is used because the number of threads often exceeds the available CPU cores.

## How multiple threads improve performance

Tasks can be categorized into two main types:
1. CPU-Bound tasks: Tasks whose execution heavily relies on the CPU.
2. IO-Bound tasks: Tasks highly dependent on Input/Output operations.
   > Such as communication with a network or performing read/write operations on a file.

> In practice, tasks often involve a combination of both CPU and IO operations.


For **CPU-bound tasks**, the number of threads should generally be limited to the number of available CPU cores. This is because:
- **Context switching overhead**: When you create more threads than cores, the CPU must frequently switch between threads, which introduces overhead.
- **Time-slicing is inefficient for CPU-bound tasks**: Since CPU-bound tasks require uninterrupted CPU time to perform heavy computations, having too many threads competing for CPU time results in smaller time slices for each thread, reducing the overall efficiency of the program.

#### Key Takeaways:
- **For CPU-bound tasks**: The ideal number of threads should be approximately equal to the number of CPU cores. This ensures each core can work on one thread without the need for frequent context switching, which can degrade performance.
- **For I/O-bound tasks**: You can afford to have more threads than CPU cores because these tasks spend much of their time waiting for I/O (e.g., network or disk operations), so the CPU is often idle, allowing it to handle multiple threads.

# Creating Threads

- A thread is represented by an object of the `java.lang.Thread` class.
- We must call the method `start()` to create a thread, which will call the `run()` method behind the scene.
- There are three approaches to creating a thread:
  1. By **extending the `Thread` class**:
      ```java
      public class HelloThread extends Thread {
          @Override
          public void run () {
              System.out.println("Hello from HelloThread class");
          }
      }
      ```
      ```java
      HelloThread thread = new HelloThread();
      thread.start();
      ```
      > We cannot use this approach if our class is already extending another class.

  2. By implementing the **Runnable functional interface**:
      ```java
      Runnable runnable = () -> System.out.println("Hi from Java Thread");
      Thread thread = new Thread(runnable);
      thread.start();
      ```
      > We can also pass a class that implements `Runnable`:
      ```java
      public class HelloRunnable implements Runnable {
          @Override
          public void run() {
              System.out.println("Hello from HelloRunnable class");
          }
      }
      ```
      ```java
      Thread thread = new Thread(new HelloRunnable());
      thread.start();
      ```

  3. By employing a **method reference**:
      ```java
      public class Hello {
          public static void sayHello() {
              System.out.println("Hello from Method Reference approach");
          }
      }
      ```
      ```java
      Thread thread = new Thread(Hello::sayHello);
      thread.start();
      ```
     > The method reference must refer to a method that takes no parameters and returns void.

# Thread methods

### `Thread.getId()`, `Thread.getName()`
- The JVM assigns an **id** and a **name** to each thread to allow to identify each tread.
- To retrieve the thread we use `Thread.getId()` and `Thread.getName()` methods.
    > `Thread.getId()` is deprecated from Java 19, we now should use `Thread.threadId()`.


### `Thread.currentThread()`
- `Thread.getId()` or `Thread.getName()` cannot be directly called without obtaining the current Thread instance.
    > Unless our class directly extends the `Thread` class.
- We need to use `Thread.currentThread()` to obtain the current thread.

```java
Thread currentThread = Thread.currentThread();
long id = currentThread.threadId();
String name = currentThread.getName();
```
### `Thread.sleep()`

`Thread.sleep()` pause the execution of a thread for a specified duration in milliseconds.
> Useful for debugging

### `Thread.join()`

- We use `Thread.join()` to synchronize the execution of threads and wait for a specific thread to complete.

### `Thread.setPriority()`, `Thread.getPriority()`

- A thread priority is represented by an integer from `MIN_PRIORITY(1)` to `MAX_PRIORITY(10)`.
- To prevent *starvation*, the scheduler might occasionally choose lower-priority.

### `Thread.wait()`, `notify()`, `notifyALl()`

- The `wait()` and `notify()` methods are part of the inter-thread communication mechanismprovided by the Object class.
- They are used to coordinate the execution of threads and ensure proper synchronization.
> wait() and notify() must be called from within a `synchronized` block.
> 
- #### `wait()` Method:

  - `wait()` causes the current thread to release the lock on the object it is called on and enters in waiting state.
  - It is often used in conjunction with a loop and a condition to wait until a specific condition is met.

- #### `notify()` Method:

  - `notify()` method wakes up one of the threads that are currently in the waiting state.
  > `notifyAll()` method wakes up all threads that are currently in the waiting state.


# Race condition

- A race condition occurs when two threads access a shared variable at the same time.
- The value of the thread that writes its value last is preserved, because the thread is writing over the value that the previous thread wrote.

### `synchronized` keyword

- The `synchronized` keyword ensure that only one thread can execute a synchronized block or method at a time.
- This is crucial for preventing race conditions and maintaining data consistency in multithreaded programs.
- ##### Synchonized Block:
    ```java
    synchronized (object) {
        // Code that needs to be synchronized
    }
    ```
    > `object` is the monitor (lock) on which synchronization is applied.

- ##### Synchronized Method:

    The synchronized keyword can also be applied to entire methods.

    ```java
    public synchronized void synchronizedMethod() {
        // Code that needs to be synchronized
    }
    ```
    > When a method is declared as synchronized, it implicitly uses the object instance as the monitor.


### `volatile` keyword

- Threads may keep a local copy of a variable in the CPU cache.
    > This local copy is used exclusively by the current thread, while other threads may access the variable from main memory.
- Without synchronization, changes made to the local copy might not be reflected in the main memory immediately.
- As a result, other threads could read outdated or stale values of the variable.

- **Using the `volatile` keyword** ensures that all reads and writes to the variable happen directly from and to main memory, ensuring all threads see the most up-to-date value.

# Deadlock

A deadlock arise when two threads are waiting eachother to release different locked ressources.
> Image two threads, T1 and T2, each currently holding a specific resource, T1 hold R1, and T2 hold R2. Now, T1 is requesting R2 and T2 is requesting R1. The program will wait infinitly.

```java
Thread thread1 = new Thread(() -> {
    synchronized (R1) {
        System.out.println("Thread T1 locked : Resource R1");
        synchronized (R2) {
            System.out.println("Thread T1 locked : Resource R2");
        }
    }
});

Thread thread2 = new Thread(() -> {
    synchronized (R2) {
        System.out.println("Thread T2 locked : Resource R2");
        synchronized (R1) {
            System.out.println("Thread T2 locked : Resource R1");
        }
    }
});
thread1.start(); 
// "Thread T1 locked : Resource R1", ... waiting R2 to release
thread2.start(); 
// "Thread T2 locked : Resource R2", ... waiting R1 to release
```

### How to avoid Deadlock
1. **Avoid nested Locks** (nested `synchronized`)
2. **Avoid Unnecessary Locks**: only apply locks to the members that truly require them.
3. **Lock Hierarchy**:  Establish a hierarchy for acquiring locks and ensure that all threads follow this hierarchy.
    > This approach helps prevent circular waiting scenarios

    ```java
    Thread thread1 = new Thread(() -> {
        synchronized (R1) {
            synchronized (R2) {
            }
        }
    });

    Thread thread2 = new Thread(() -> {
        synchronized (R1) { // now we are following same hierarchy
            synchronized (R2) {
            }
        }
    });
    thread1.start(); 
    // Thread T1 locked : Resource R1
    // Thread T1 locked : Resource R2
    thread2.start(); 
    // Thread T2 locked : Resource R2
    // Thread T2 locked : Resource R1
    ```
    > Now we fixed the deadlock by following the same hierarchy

4. Use `java.util.concurrent` Utilities: we can use `ReentrantLock` classto manage threads and locks more efficiently.
    ```java
    ReentrantLock lock1 = new ReentrantLock();

    if (lock1.tryLock(100, TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS)) {
        try {
            // Business logics
        } finally {
            lock1.unlock();
        }
    }
    ```

# Virtual Threads

- Virtual threads are **lightweight** threads introduced to reduce the resource overhead of traditional threads (OS Threads).
- It allows creating thousands of threads with minimal resources, **improving performance in I/O-bound** applications.
- It simplifies concurrent programming, eliminating the need for complex thread pools or async code.
> Virtual threads are part of **Project Loom**, an initiative by the OpenJDK community


### Types of Threads

There are two types of threads: **Kernel Threads** (OS threads) and **User Threads**.
- Kernel threads are managed by the operating system (OS), while user threads are managed by the application.
- Kernel threads provide better performance in multi-core environments because they can achieve true parallelism.
  User threads are faster for operations like thread creation and context switching because they don't require system calls, unlike kernel threads, which do.
> The type of thread is handled by JVM, and we have no control over witch type to use.

### Thread Models

- Java use the **1:1 Model**, where each user thread is map to a single kernel thread.
    > Meaning when creating a thread, JVM create both a Kernel and a User thread mapped to eachother.
- This allow to take advantage of both thread type, but at the cost of performance.

### Virtual Thread
- Virtual thread are build on top of **1:1 Model** model to provide a **M:N Model** (many to many).
- It resolve the performance issue by providing faster creation/deletion and context-switching.

### Creating a Virtual Thread
There are **two ways** to create a virtual thread:

1. Using `Thread.startVirtualThread(Runnable r)`:
    ```java
    Runnable runnable = () -> System.out.println("Hello");
    Thread.startVirtualThread(runnable).join();
    ```
2. Using the `Thread.ofVirtual()` method:
    ```java
    Runnable runnable = () -> System.out.println("Hello");
    Thread.ofVirtual().start(runnable).join();
    ```
